Once around, LHS 1140.
These catalog numbers get more bizarre
every time. So, star LHS 1140 is a faint
star 49 light years from Earth and
located in the constellation of Settus,
the Whale, ringed in the ellipse there.
You can't actually see the star. It's
too faint. But what attracted
everybody's attention is the fact that
this is a cool red dwarf star. 18% the
mass of the sun, 21% the diameter, just
over 3,000 Kelvin, and a very low power
output, just about a third of a percent
of the heat output from the star itself.
So all of that's fairly typical for a
red dwarf. It's also 5 billion years
old, about the same age as the sun, and
it's a very inactive red dwarf because
of its great age. Red dwarf stars can be
very rowdy, creating a lot of solar
flares during their early years. And
that can be very unfortunate for any
orbiting planets because they will get
large doses of X-rays and sudden
variations in the heat flux as a result.
But once the star calms down after 500
million years or so, then the planets
have a chance. And so if they're able to
evolve and acquire an atmosphere and a
biosphere after that, then they stand a
chance of uh having plenty of time for
evolution. And so that's one of the
things that attracts us to this. And of
course, we're looking for planets.
And we have found one. We have found LHS
1140B
discovered in 2017 by the ME Earth
program which is clearly looking for
Earthlike planets. And this one is in a
nice circular orbit that takes just
under 25 days to go around the star. But
it's a tenth of the Earth's sun
distance, 0.1 AU from the star. So 10
times nearer. it's going to get a hund
times the relative um capture in terms
of heat output which is good because the
uh star is only outputting a third of a
percent of the total power output of the
sun.
So what do we know about it? Well, it's
a super earth. It's 5.6 times the mass
of the earth and 170% the radius. So
nearly double the diameter
made of rock it appears because the
density is actually 5.9 g per cubic cm.
And so that's slightly greater than the
earth which is about 5.7 something like
that. And that means it's going to have
considerably stronger gravity it in its
own uh right. Even though it's larger,
the extra mass is going to really give
it quite a strong pull of gravity.
Now, the total heat flux when you do the
maths and work it all out properly, 43%
of that of the Earth. So, that's uh a
little bit lower than uh you might have
expected. Um and that's because of this
low temperature of the star as well as
its uh its small size.
Overall, that gives you a baseline
temperature of 27
below freezing centigrade. So, minus
27C.
Now, if it's got an atmosphere, it's
going to bring that up. The Earth itself
would be well below freezing if it
wasn't for our greenhouse effect. Um,
it's only the fact that we might be
increasing that greenhouse effect that
is really worrying. We're not creating
all of it, but we are making it worse.
And so
this being a much larger planet with
nearly six times the mass and much
stronger surface gravity, it should be
able to hang on to a thick atmosphere
and with that get a corresponding
significant boost in greenhouse effect
and temperature. And it's been
calculated that that might bring it up
to a fairly warm 23° C on the planet. So
a very very interesting potentially
habitable world itself.
The Hubble Space Telescope was turned to
it in 2020 and it thinks it's detected
ocean of water and perhaps there is a
rocky core about 20% of the uh total
mass and a lot of water on top of that.
But they couldn't rule out it being a
mini Neptune. Now, the James Web Space
Telescope hints of there being an
atmosphere of nitrogen and carbon
dioxide. Well, that carbon dioxide would
certainly warm it up. But most
significantly, it was able to rule out
hydrogen H2 as the atmosphere. So,
probably not a mini Neptune. Certainly
pointing at a very interesting world
indeed.
Now, beyond the discovery of planet B,
planet C was discovered and first
proposed in 2018 and confirmed
afterwards. And this is an interior
planet orbiting close to the star. It's
again a super Earth, nearly double the
mass of the Earth, slightly larger, and
again rocky, 5 g per cubic cm. So, a
second rocky world in the system. Um,
but being interior uh and far too close
to the star, this is a scorching 561
Kelvin. So that's uh way too hot for any
liquid water. And indeed, observations
rule out there being any carbon dioxide
or water. So perhaps this is a bit more
like a super Mercury rather than a super
Earth. Um, but again, more observations.
We're going to find out more about these
guys as we go forward. So, that's it for
this one. Thanks very much for listening
and I hope you enjoyed that one.